                                Simple CHT:
        A New Derivation of the Weakest Failure Detector for Consensus

                                              Petr Kuznetsov

                                 TU Belrin/Deutsche Telekom Laboratories



                                                  Abstract

   The paper proposes an alternative proof that Ω, an oracle that outputs a process identifier and guaran-
tees that eventually the same correct process identifier is output at all correct processes, provides minimal
information about failures for solving consensus in read-write shared-memory systems: every oracle that
gives enough failure information to solve consensus can be used to implement Ω.
   Unlike the original proof by Chandra, Hadzilacos and Toueg (CHT), the proof presented in this paper
builds upon the very fact that 2-process wait-free consensus is impossible. Also, since the oracle that is used
to implement Ω can solve consensus, the implementation is allowed to directly access consensus objects. As
a result, the proposed proof is shorter and conceptually simpler than the original one.


1   Introduction

   The presence of faults and the lack of synchrony make distributed computing interesting. In an asyn-
chronous system which assumes no bounds on communication delays and relative processing speeds, even
a basic form of non-trivial synchronization (consensus) is impossible if just one process may fail by crash-
ing [7, 13]. On the other hand, in a synchronous system, in the bounds exist and known a priori, almost
any meaningful fault-tolerant synchronization problem becomes solvable. On the other hand, This gap sug-
gests that the amount of synchrony is a crucial factor in reasoning about solvability of distributed computing
problems in the presence of faults.
   Chandra and Toueg proposed failure detectors as a convenient language to describe synchrony assump-
tions. Informally, a failure detector is a distributed oracle that provides processes with hints about fail-
ures [5]. The notion of a weakest failure detector [4] captures the exact amount of synchrony needed to
solve a given problem: D is the weakest failure detector for solving M if (1) D is sufficient to solve M, i.e.,
there exists an algorithm that solves M using D, and (2) any failure detector D0 that is sufficient to solve M
provides at least as much information about failures as D does, i.e., there exists a reduction algorithm that
extract the output of D using the failure information provided by D0 .
   This paper considers a distributed system in which n crash-prone processes communicate using atomic
reads and writes in shared memory. In the (binary) consensus problem [7], every process starts with a binary
input and every correct (never-failing) process is supposed to output one of the inputs such that no two
processes output different values. Asynchronous (wait-free) consensus is known to be impossible [7, 13], as
long as at least one process may fail by crashing. Chandra et al. [4] showed that the “eventual leader” failure

                                                      1
detector Ω is necessary and sufficient to solve consensus. The failure detector Ω outputs, when queried, a
process identifier, such that, eventually, the same correct process identifier is output at all correct processes.
   The reduction technique presented in [4] is very interesting in its own right, since it not only allows us to
determine the weakest failure detector for consensus, but also establishes a framework for determining the
weakest failure detector for any problem. Informally, the reduction algorithm of [4] works as follows. Let D
be any failure detector that can be used to solve consensus. Processes periodically query their modules of D,
exchange the values returned by D, and arrange the accumulated output of the failure detector in the form
of ever-growing directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). Every process periodically uses its DAG as a stimulus for
simulating multiple runs of the given consensus algorithm. It is shown in [4] that, eventually, the collection
of simulated runs will include a critical run in which a single process p “hides” the decided value, and, thus,
no extension of the run can reach a decision without cooperation of p. As long as a process performing
the simulation observes a run that the process suspects to remain critical, it outputs the “hiding” process
identifier of the “first” such run as the extracted output of Ω. The existence of a critical run and the fact that
the correct processes agree on ever-growing prefixes of simulated runs imply that, eventually, the correct
processes will always output the identifier of the same correct process.
   Crucially, the existence of a critical run is established in [4] using the notion of valence [7]: a simulated
finite run is called v-valent (v ∈ {0, 1}) if all simulated extensions of it decide v. If both decisions 0 and 1
are “reachable” from the finite run, then the run is called bivalent. Recall that in [7], the notion of valence
is used to derive a critical run, and then it is shown that such a run cannot exist in an asynchronous system,
implying the impossibility of consensus. In [4], a similar argument is used to extract the output of Ω in
a partially synchronous system that allows for solving consensus. Thus, in a sense, the technique of [4]
rehashes arguments of [7]. It is challenging to find a proof that Ω is necessary to solve consensus building
upon the very fact that 2-process wait-free consensus is impossible.
   This paper addresses this challenge. It is shown that Ω is necessary to solve consensus using the very
impossibility of 2-process wait-free consensus, without “opening the box” and considering the problem
semantics. The resulting proof is shorter and simpler that the original proof of [4].
   On the technical side, the paper uses two fundamental results and one observation. First, the technique
of Zieliński [15] that allows us to construct, given an algorithm A that uses a failure detector D, an asyn-
chronous algorithm A0 that simulates runs of A using a static sample of D’s output (captured in a DAG),
instead of the “real” output of the failure detector. The live processor set that run A0 may be different than
the live set of processor implied by the sample of D. Therefore, the asynchronous algorithm A0 guarantees
that every infinite simulated run is safe (every prefix of it is a finite run of A), but not necessarily live (some
correct process may not be able to make progress).
   Second, the paper also makes use of the BG-simulation technique [1, 3] that allows k + 1 processes
simulate, in a wait-free manner, a k-resilient (with at most k faulty processes) run of A0 . Using a series
of consensus instances (provided by the algorithm A using D), processes locally simulate the very same
sequence of 1-resilient runs and eventually identify a “never-deciding” 1-resilient run of A0 . Since A0 is
an asynchronous simulation of A, a 1-resilient run of A0 that includes infinitely many steps of each correct
process should be deciding. Thus, exactly one correct process appears in the 1-resilient never-deciding run
only finitely often. To emulate Ω, it is thus sufficient to output the process that appears the least in that
1-resilient run. Eventually, all correct process agree on the same never-deciding 1-resilient run, and will
always output the same correct process. The observation here is that a reduction algorithm may directly
access consensus objects, since it is given a failure detector which can be used to solve consensus.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the system model. Sections 3 presents
the reduction algorithm. Section 4 overviews the related work and Section 5 concludes the paper by dis-


                                                        2
cussing implications of the presented results.

2     Model

  The model of processes communicating through read-write shared objects and using failure detectors is
based on [4, 9, 10, 11]. The details necessary for showing the results of this paper are described below.

2.1     Processes and objects

   A distributed system is composed of a set Π of n processes {p1 , . . . , pn } (n ≥ 2). Processes are subject to
crash failures. A process that never fails is said to be correct. Processes that are not correct are called faulty.
Process communicate through applying atomic operations on a collection of shared objects. In this paper,
the shared objects are registers, i.e., they export only conventional atomic read-write operations.

2.2     Failure patterns and failure detectors

   A failure pattern F is a function from the time range T = {0} ∪ N to 2Π , where F (t) denotes the set of
processes that have crashed by time t. Once a process crashes, it does not recover, i.e., ∀t : F (t) ⊆ F (t+1).
The set of faulty processes in F , ∪t∈T F (t), is denoted by faulty(F ). Respectively, correct(F ) = Π −
faulty(F ). A process p ∈ F (t) is said to be crashed at time t. An environment is a set of failure patterns.
This paper considers environments that consists of failure patterns in which at least one process is correct.
   A failure detector history H with range R is a function from Π × T to R. H(pi , t) is interpreted as the
value output by the failure detector module of process pi at time t. A failure detector D with range RD is
a function that maps each failure pattern to a (non-empty) set of failure detector histories with range RD .
D(F ) denotes the set of possible failure detector histories permitted by D for failure pattern F . Possible
ranges of failure detectors are not a priori restricted.

2.3     Algorithms

   An algorithm A using a failure detector D is a collection of deterministic automata, one for each process
in the system. Ai denotes the automaton on which process pi runs the algorithm A. Computation proceeds
in atomic steps of A. In each step of A, process pi

    (i) invokes an atomic operation (read or write) on a shared object and receives a response or queries its
        failure detector module Di and receives a value from D, and

    (ii) applies its current state, the response received from the shared object or the value output by D to the
         automaton Ai to obtain a new state.

A step of A is thus identified by a tuple (pi , d), where d is the failure detector value output at pi during that
step if D was queried, and ⊥ otherwise.
   If the state transitions of the automata Ai do not depend on the failure detector values, the algorithm A is
called asynchronous. Thus, for an asynchronous algorithm, a step is uniquely identified by the process id.




                                                        3
2.4    Runs

    A state of A defines the state of each process and each object in the system. An initial state I of A
specifies an initial state for every automaton Ai and every shared object.
    A run of algorithm A using a failure detector D in an environment E is a tuple R = hF, H, I, S, T i
where F ∈ E is a failure pattern, H ∈ D(F ) is a failure detector history, I is an initial state of A, S is an
infinite sequence of steps of A respecting the automata A and the sequential specification of shared objects,
and T is an infinite list of increasing time values indicating when each step of S has occurred, such that for
all k ∈ N, if S[k] = (pi , d) with d 6= ⊥, then pi ∈  / F (T [k]) and d = H(pi , T [k]).
    A run hF, H, I, S, T i is fair if every process in correct(F ) takes infinitely many steps in S, and k-resilient
if at least n − k processes appear in S infinitely often. A partial run of an algorithm A is a finite prefix of a
run of A.
    For two steps s and s0 of processes pi and pj , respectively, in a (partial) run R of an algorithm A, we say
that s causally precedes s0 if in R, and we write s → s0 , if (1) pi = pj , and s occurs before s0 in R, or (2) s
is a write step, s0 is a read step, and s occurs before s0 in R, or (3) there exists s00 in R, such that s → s00 and
s00 → s0 .

2.5    Consensus

   In the binary consensus problem, every process starts the computation with an input value in {0, 1} (we
say the process proposes the value), and eventually reaches a distinct state associated with an output value
in {0, 1} (we say the process decides the value). An algorithm A solves consensus in an environment E if in
every fair run of A in E, (i) every correct process eventually decides, (ii) every decided value was previously
proposed, and (iii) no two processes decide different values.
   Given a an algorithm that solves consensus, it is straightforward to implement an abstraction cons that
can be accessed with an operation propose(v) (v ∈ {0, 1}) returning a value in {0, 1}, and guarantees that
every propose operation invoked by a correct process eventually returns, every returned value was previously
proposed, and no two different values are ever returned.

2.6    Weakest failure detector

   We say that an algorithm A using D0 extracts the output of D in E, if A implements a distributed variable
D-output such that for every run R = hF, H 0 , S, T i of A in which F ∈ E, there exists H ∈ D(F ) such that
for all pi ∈ Π and t ∈ T, D-outputi (t) = H(pi , t) (i.e., the value of D-output at pi at time t is H(pi , t)). We
say that A is a reduction algorithm. (A more precise definition of a reduction algorithm is given in [11].)
   If, for failure detectors D and D0 and an environment E, there is a reduction algorithm using D0 that
extracts the output D in E, then we say that D is weaker than D0 in E.
   D is the weakest failure detector to solve a problem M (e.g., consensus) in E if there is an algorithm that
solves M using D in E and D is weaker than any failure detector that can be used to solve M in E.

3     Extracting Ω

   Let A be an algorithm that solves consensus using a failure detector D. The goal is to construct an
algorithm that emulates Ω using A and D. Recall that to emulate Ω means to output, at each time and at
each process, a process identifiers such that, eventually, the same correct process is always output.


                                                         4
     Shared variables:
       for all pi ∈ Π: Gi , initially empty graph

1    ki := 0
2    while true do
3       for all pj ∈ Π do Gi ← Gi ∪ Gj
4       di := query failure detector D
5       ki := ki + 1
6       add [pi , di , ki ] and edges from all other vertices
             of Gi to [pi , di , ki ], to Gi


                                  Figure 1. Building a DAG: the code for each process pi


3.1     Overview

   As in [4], the reduction algorithm of this paper uses failure detector D to construct an ever-growing
directed acyclic graph (DAG) that contains a sample of the values output by D in the current run and
captures some temporal relations between them. Following [15], this DAG can be used by an asynchronous
algorithm A0 to simulate a (possibly finite and unfair) run of A. Recall that, using BG-simulation [1, 3], 2
processes can simulate a 1-resilient run of A0 . The fact that 1-resilient 2-process consensus is impossible
implies that the simulation must produce at least one ”non-deciding” 1-resilient run of A0 .
   Now every correct process locally simulates all executions of BG-simulation on two processes q1 and
q2 that simulate a 1-resilient run of A0 of the whole system Π. Eventually, every correct process locates a
never-deciding run of A0 and uses the run to extract the output of Ω: it is sufficient to output the process
that takes the least number of steps in the “smallest” non-deciding simulated run of A0 . Indeed, exactly one
correct process takes finitely many steps in the non-deciding 1-resilient run of A0 : otherwise, the run would
simulate a fair and thus deciding run of A.
   The reduction algorithm extracting Ω from A and D consists of two components that are running in
parallel: the communication component and the computation component. In the communication component,
every process pi maintains the ever-growing directed acyclic graph (DAG) Gi by periodically querying its
failure detector module and exchanging the results with the others through the shared memory. In the
computation component, every process simulates a set of runs of A using the DAGs and maintains the
extracted output of Ω.

3.2     DAGs

   The communication component is presented in Figure 1. This task maintains an ever-growing DAG that
contains a finite sample of the current failure detector history. The DAG is stored in a register Gi which can
be updated by pi and read by all processes.
   DAG Gi has some special properties which follow from its construction [4]. Let F be the current failure
pattern, and H ∈ D(F ) be the current failure detector history. Then a fair run of the algorithm in Figure 1
guarantees that there exists a map τ : Π × RD × N 7→ T, such that, for every correct process pi and every
time t (x(t) denotes here the value of variable x at time t):

    (1) The vertices of Gi (t) are of the form [pj , d, `] where pj ∈ Π, d ∈ RD and ` ∈ N.



                                                                5
        (a) For each vertex v = [pj , d, `], pj ∈
                                                / F (τ (v)) and d = H(pj , τ (v)). That is, d is the value output
            by pj ’s failure detector module at time τ (v).
        (b) For each edge (v, v 0 ), τ (v) < τ (v 0 ). That is, any edge in Gi reflects the temporal order in which
            the failure detector values are output.

  (2) If v = [pj , d, `] and v 0 = [pj , d0 , `0 ] are vertices of Gi (t) and ` < `0 then (v, v 0 ) is an edge of Gi (t).

  (3) Gi (t) is transitively closed: if (v, v 0 ) and (v 0 , v 00 ) are edges of Gi (t), then (v, v 00 ) is also an edge of
      Gi (t).

  (4) For all correct processes pj , there is a time t0 ≥ t, a d ∈ RD and a ` ∈ N such that, for every vertex v
      of Gi (t), (v, [pj , d, `]) is an edge of Gi (t0 ).

  (5) For all correct processes pj , there is a time t0 ≥ t such that Gi (t) is a subgraph of Gj (t0 ).

The properties imply that ever-growing DAGs at correct processes tend to the same infinite DAG G: limt→∞ Gi (t) =
G. In a fair run of the algorithm in Figure 1, the set of processes that obtain infinitely many vertices in G is
the set of correct processes [4].

3.3    Asynchronous simulation

   It is shown below that any infinite DAG G constructed as shown in Figure 1 can be used to simulate
partial runs of A in the asynchronous manner: instead of querying D, the simulation algorithm A0 uses the
samples of the failure detector output captured in the DAG. The pseudo-code of this simulation is presented
in Figure 2. The algorithm is hypothetical in the sense that it uses an infinite input, but this requirement is
relaxed later.
   In the algorithm, each process pi is initially associated with an initial state of A and performs a sequence
of simulated steps of A. Every process pi maintains a shared register Vi that stores the vertex of G used for
the most recent step of A simulated by pi . Each time pi is about to perform a step of A it first reads registers
V1 , . . . , Vn to obtain the vertexes of G used by processes p1 , . . . , pn for simulating the most recent causally
preceding steps of A (line 10 in Figure 2). Then pi selects the next vertex of G that succeeds all vertices
(lines 11-14). If no such vertex is found, pi blocks forever (line 13).
   Note that a correct process pi may block forever if G contains only finitely many vertices of pi . As a
result an infinite run of A0 may simulate an unfair run of A: a run in which some correct process takes only
finitely many steps. But every finite run simulated by A0 is a partial run of A.

Theorem 1 Let G be the DAG produced in a fair run R = hF, H, I, S, T i of the communication component
in Figure 1. Let R0 = hF 0 , H 0 , I 0 , S 0 , T 0 i be any fair run of A0 using G. Then the sequence of steps
simulated by A0 in R0 belongs to a (possibly unfair) run of A, RA , with input vector of I 0 and failure pattern
F . Moreover, the set of processes that take infinitely many steps in RA is correct(F ) ∩ correct(F 0 ), and if
correct(F ) ⊆ correct(F 0 ), then RA is fair.

Proof. Recall that a step of a process pi can be either a memory step in which pi accesses shared memory
or a query step in which pi queries the failure detector. Since memory steps simulated in A0 are performed
as in A, to show that algorithm A0 indeed simulates a run of A with failure pattern F , it is enough to make
sure that the sequence of simulated query steps in the simulated run (using vertices of G) could have been
observed in a run RA of A with failure pattern F and the input vector based on I 0 .


                                                            6
     Shared variables:
       V1 , . . . , Vn := ⊥, . . . , ⊥,
              {for each pj , Vj is the vertex of G
              corresponding to the latest simulated step of pj }
       Shared variables of A

7    initialize the simulated state of pi in A, based on I 0
8    ` := 0
9    while true do
        {Simulating the next pi ’s step of A}
10      U := [V1 , . . . , Vn ]
11      repeat
12         ` := ` + 1
13         wait until G includes [pi , d, `] for some d
14      until ∀j, U [j] 6= ⊥: (U [j], [pi , d, `]) ∈ G
15      Vi := [pi , d, `]
16      take the next pi ’s step of A using d as the output of D


                          Figure 2. DAG-based asynchronous algorithm A0 : code for each pi


    Let τ be a map associated with G that carries each vertex of G to an element in T such that (a) for
any vertex v = [p, d, `] of G, p ∈           / F (τ (v)) and d = H(pj , τ (v)), and (b) for every edge (v, v 0 ) of G,
                 0
τ (v) < τ (v ) (the existence of τ is established by property (5) of DAGs in Section 3.2). For each step s
simulated by A0 in R0 , let τ 0 (s) denote time when step s occurred in R0 , i.e., when the corresponding line 16
in Figure 2 was executed, and v(s) be the vertex of G used for simulating s, i.e., the value of Vi when pi
simulates s in line 16 of Figure 2.
    Consider query steps si and sj simulated by processes pi and pj , respectively. Let v(si ) = [pi , di , `]
and v(sj ) = [pj , dj , m]. WLOG, suppose that τ ([pi , di , `]) < τ ([pj , dj , m]), i.e., D outputs di at pi before
outputting dj at pj .
    If τ 0 (si ) < τ 0 (sj ), i.e., si is simulated by pi before sj is simulated by pj , then the order in which si and
sj see value di and dj is the run produced by A0 is consistent with the output of D, i.e., the values di and dj
indeed could have been observed in that order.
    Suppose now that τ 0 (si ) > τ 0 (sj ). If si and sj are not causally related in the simulated run, then R0 is
indistinguishable from a run in which si is simulated by pi before sj is simulated by pj . Thus, si and sj can
still be observed in a run of A.
    Now suppose, by contradiction that τ 0 (si ) > τ 0 (sj ) and sj causally precedes si in the simulated run,
i.e., pj simulated at least one write step s0j after sj , and pi simulated at least one read step s0i before si ,
such that s0j took place before s0i in R0 . Since before performing the memory access of s0j , pj updated Vj
with a vertex v(s0j ) that succeeds v(sj ) in G (line 15), and s0i occurs in R0 after s0j , pi must have found
v(s0j ) or a later vertex of pj in Vj before simulating step si (line 10) and, thus, the vertex of G used for
simulating si must be a descendant of [pj , dj , m], and, by properties (1) and (3) of DAGs (Section 3.2),
τ ([pi , di , `]) > τ ([pj , dj , m]) — a contradiction. Hence, the sequence of steps of A simulated in R0 could
have been observed in a run RA of A with failure pattern F .
    Since in A0 , a process simulates only its own steps of A, every process that appears infinitely often in RA
is in correct(F 0 ). Also, since each faulty in F process contains only finitely many vertices in G, eventually,
each process in correct(F 0 ) − correct(F ) is blocked in line 13 in Figure 2, and, thus, every process that


                                                              7
 appears infinitely often in RA is also in correct(F ). Now consider a process pi ∈ correct(F 0 )∩correct(F ).
 Property (4) of DAGs implies that for every set V of vertices of G, there exists a vertex of pi in G such that
 for all v 0 ∈ V , (v 0 , v) is an edge in G. Thus, the wait statement in line 13 cannot block pi forever, and pi
 takes infinitely many steps in RA .
    Hence, the set of processes that appear infinitely often in RA is exactly correct(F 0 )∩correct(F ). Specifi-
 cally, if correct(F ) ⊆ correct(F 0 ), then the set of processes that appear infinitely often in RA is correct(F ),
 and the run is fair.                                                                                            
 Note that in a fair run, the properties of the algorithm in Figure 2 remain the same if the infinite DAG G
 is replaced with a finite ever-growing DAG Ḡ constructed in parallel (Figure 1) such that limt→∞ Ḡ = G.
 This is because such a replacement only affects the wait statement in line 13 which blocks pi until the first
 vertex of pi that causally succeeds every simulated step recently ”witnessed” by pi is found in G, but this
 cannot take forever if pi is correct (properties (4) and (5) of DAGs in Section 3.2). The wait blocks forever
 if the vertex is absent in G, which may happen only if pi is faulty.

 3.4    BG-simulation

    Borowsky and Gafni proposed in [1, 3], a simulation technique by which k + 1 simulators q1 , . . . , qk+1
 can wait-free simulate a k-resilient execution of any asynchronous n-process protocol. Informally, the
 simulation works as follows. Every process qi tries to simulate steps of all n processes p1 , . . . , pn in a
 round-robin fashion. Simulators run an agreement protocol to make sure that every step is simulated at most
 once. Simulating a step of a given process may block forever if and only if some simulator has crashed in
 the middle of the corresponding agreement protocol. Thus, even if k out of k + 1 simulators crash, at least
 n − k simulated processes can still make progress. The simulation thus guarantees at least n − k processes
 in {p1 , . . . , pn } accept infinitely many simulated steps.
    In the computational component of the reduction algorithm, the BG-simulation technique is used as fol-
 lows. Let BG(A0 ) denote the simulation protocol for 2 processes q1 and q2 which allows them to simulate,
 in a wait-free manner, a 1-resilient execution of algorithm A0 for n processes p1 , . . . , pn . The complete
 reduction algorithm thus employs a triple simulation (Figure 3): every process pi simulates multiple runs of
 two processes q1 and q2 that use BG-simulation to produce a 1-resilient run of A0 on processes p01 , . . . , p0n in
 which steps of the original algorithm A are periodically simulated using (ever-growing) DAGs G1 , ..., Gn .
 (To avoid confusion, we use p0j to denote the process that models pj in a run of A0 simulated by a “real”
 process pi .)
    We are going to use the following property which is trivially satified by BG-simulation:

(BG0) A run of BG-simulation in which every simulator take infinitely many steps simulates a run in which
      every simulated process takes infinitely many steps.

 3.5    Using consensus

    The triple simulation we are going to employ faces one complication though. The simulated runs of the
 asynchronous algorithm A0 may vary depending on which process the simulation is running. This is because
 G1 , ..., Gn are maintained by a parallel computation component (Figure 1), and a process simulating a step
 of A0 may perform a different number of cycles reading the current version of its DAG before a vertex with
 desired properties is located (line 13 in Figure 2). Thus, the same sequence of steps of q1 and q2 simulated
 at different processes may result in different 1-resilient runs of A0 : waiting until a vertex [pi , d, `] appears


                                                         8
                                                            pi

                                           simulates runs of BG(A0) on

                                                                               BG(A0)
                                                q1                q2


                                                      simulate runs of A0 on

                                                                                        A0
                                    p01         p02               p0n−1         p0n


                                                simulate runs of A

  Figure 3. Three levels of simulation: real processes pi simulate a system of two BG-simulators q1 and q2 that
  run BG(A0 ) to simulate an (n − 1)-resilient run of A0 on p01 , . . . , p0n .



   r := 0
   repeat
      r := r + 1
      if G contains [pi , d, `] for some d then u := 1
      else u := 0
      v := consi,`
                 r .propose(u)
   until v = 1


  Figure 4. Expanded line 13 of Figure 2: waiting until G includes a vertex [pi , d, `] for some d. Here G is any
  DAG generated by the algorithm in Figure 1.



in Gj at process pj may take different number of local steps checking Gj , depending on the time when pj
executes the wait statement in line 13 of Figure 2.
    To resolve this issue, the wait statement is implemented using a series of consensus instances consi,`     1 ,
      i,`
cons2 , . . . (Figure 4). If pi is correct, then eventually each correct process will have a vertex [pi , d, `] in
its DAG and, thus, the code in Figure 4 is non-blocking, and Theorem 1 still holds. Furthermore, the use of
consensus ensures that if a process, while simulating a step of A0 at process pi , went through r steps before
reaching line 14 in Figure 2, then every process simulating this very step does the same. Thus, a given
sequence of steps of q1 and q2 will result in the same simulated 1-resilient run of A0 , regardless of when and
where the simulation is taking place.

3.6   Extracting Ω

  The computational component of the reduction algorithm is presented in Figure 5. In the component,
every process pi locally simulates multiple runs of a system of 2 processes q1 and q2 that run algorithm
BG(A0 ), to produce a 1-resilient run of A0 (Figures 2 and 4). Recall that A0 , in its turn, simulates a run of


                                                             9
17   for all binary 2-vectors J0 do
          { For all possible consensus inputs for q1 and q2 }
18     σ0 := the empty string
19     explore(J0 , σ0 )

20   function explore(J, σ)
21     for all qj = q1 , q2 do
22       ρ := empty string
23       repeat
24          ρ := ρ · qj
25          let p0` be the process that appears the least in SCHA0 (J, σ · ρ)
26          Ω-output := p`
27       until STA (J, σ · ρ) is decided
28     explore(J, σ · q1 )
29     explore(J, σ · q2 )


     Figure 5. Computational component of the reduction algorithm: code for each process pi . Here STA (J, σ)
     denotes the state of A reached by the partial run of A0 simulated in the partial run of BG(A0 ) with schedule σ
     and input state J, and SCHA0 (J, σ) denotes the corresponding schedule of A0 .



the original algorithm A, using, instead of D, the values provided by an ever-growing DAG G. In simulating
the part of A0 of process p0i presented in Figure 4, q1 and q2 count each access of a consensus instance consi,`  r
as one local step of p0i that need to be simulated. Also, in BG(A0 ), when qj is about to simulate the first step
of p0i , qj uses its own input value as an input value of p0i .
   For each simulated state S of BG(A0 ), pi periodically checks whether the state of A in S is deciding,
i.e., whether some process has decided in the state of A in S. As we show, eventually, the same infinite
non-deciding 1-resilient run of A0 will be simulated by all processes, which allows for extracting the output
of Ω.
   The algorithm in Figure 5 explores solo extensions of q1 and q2 starting from growing prefixes. Since,
by property (BG0) of BG-simulation (Section 3.4), a run of BG(A0 ) in which both q1 and q2 participate
infinitely often simulates a run of A0 in which every pj ∈ {p01 , . . . , p0n participates infinitely often, and, by
Theorem 1, such a run will produce a fair and thus deciding run of A. Thus, if there is an infinite non-
deciding run simulated by the algorithm in Figure 2, it must be a run produced by a solo extension of q1 or
q2 starting from some finite prefix.

Lemma 2 The algorithm in Figure 5 eventually forever executes lines 23–27.

Proof. Consider any run of the algorithm in Figures 1, 4 and 5. Let F be the failure pattern of that run.
Let G be the infinite limit DAG approximated by the algorithm in Figure 1. By contradiction, suppose that
lines 23–27 in Figure 5 never block pi .
   Suppose that for some initial J0 , the call of explore(J0 , σ0 ) performed by pi in line 19 never returns.
Since the cycle in lines 23–27 in Figure 5 always terminates, there is an infinite sequence of recursive calls
explore(J0 , σ0 ), explore(J0 , σ1 ), explore(J0 , σ2 ), . . ., where each σ` is a one-step extension of σ`−1 . Thus,
there exists an infinite never deciding schedule σ̃ such that the run of BG(A0 ) based on σ̃ and J0 produces
a never-deciding run of A0 . Suppose that both q1 and q2 appear in σ̃ infinitely often. By property (BG0) of
BG-simulation (Section 3.4), a run of BG(A0 ) in which both q1 and q2 participate infinitely often simulates

                                                             10
a run of A0 in which every pj ∈ {p01 , . . . , p0n } participates infinitely often, and, by Theorem 1, such a run
will produce a fair and thus deciding run of A — a contradiction.
   Thus, if there is an infinite non-deciding run simulated by the algorithm in Figure 2, it must be a run
produced by a solo extension of q1 or q2 starting from some finite prefix. Let σ̄ be the first such prefix in
the order defined by the algorithm in Figure 2 and q` be the first process whose solo extension of σ is never
deciding. Since the cycle in lines 23–27 always terminates, the recursive exploration of finite prefixes σ
in lines 28 and 29 eventually reaches σ̄, the algorithm reaches line 22 with σ = σ̄ and qj = q` . Then the
succeeding cycle in lines 23–27 never terminates — a contradiction.
   Thus, for all inputs J0 , the call of explore(J0 , σ0 ) performed by pi in line 19 returns. Hence, for every
finite prefix σ, any solo extension of σ produces a finite deciding run of A. We establish a contradiction, by
deriving a wait-free algorithm that solves consensus among q1 and q2 .
   Let G̃ be the infinite limit DAG constructed in Figure 1. Let β be a map from vertices of G̃ to N defined as
follows: for each vertex [pi , d, `] in G, β([pi , d, `]) is the value of variable r at the moment when any run of
A0 (produced by the algorithm in Figure 2) exits the cycle in Figure 4, while waiting until [pi , d, `] appears
in G. If there is no such run, β([pi , d, `]) is set to 0. Note that the use of consensus implies that if in any
simulated run of A0 , [pi , d, `] has been found after r iterations, then β([pi , d, `]) = r, i.e., β is well-defined.
   Now we consider an asynchronous read-write algorithm A0β that is defined exactly like A0 , but instead of
going through the consensus invocations in Figure 4, A0β performs β([pi , d, `]) local steps. Now consider
the algorithm BG(A0β ) that is defined exactly as BG(A0 ) except that in BG(A0β ), q1 and q2 BG-simulate
runs of A0β . For every sequence σ of steps of q1 and q2 , the runs of BG(A0 ) and BG(A0β ) agree on the
sequence of steps of p01 , . . . , p0n in the corresponding runs of A0 and A0β , respectively. Moreover, they agree
on the runs of A resulting from these runs of A0 and A0β . This is because the difference between A0 and A0β
consist only in the local steps and does not affect the simulated state of A.
   We say that a sequence σ of steps of q1 and q2 is deciding with J0 , if, when started with J0 , the run of
BG(A0β ) produces a deciding run of A. By our hypothesis, every eventually solo schedule σ is deciding
for each input J0 . As we showed above, every schedule in which both q1 and q2 appear sufficiently often is
deciding by property (BG0) of BG-simulation. Thus, every schedule of BG(A0β ) is deciding for all inputs.
   Consider the trees of all deciding schedules of BG(A0β ) for all possible inputs J0 . All these trees have
finite branching (each vertex has at most 2 descendants) and finite paths. By König’s lemma, the trees are
finite. Thus, the set of vertices of G̃ used by the runs of A0 simulated by deciding schedules of BG(A0β ) is
also finite. Let Ḡ be a finite subgraph of G̃ that includes all vertices of G̃ used by these runs.
   Finally, we obtain a wait-free consensus algorithm for q1 and q2 that works as follows. Each qj runs
BG(A0β ) (using a finite graph Ḡ) until a decision is obtained in the simulated run of A. At this point, qj
returns the decided value. But BG(A0β ) produces only deciding runs of A, and each deciding run of A
solves consensus for inputs provided by q1 and q2 — a contradiction.                                                



Theorem 3 In all environments E, if a failure detector D can be used to solve consensus in E, then Ω is
weaker than D in E.

Proof. Consider any run of the algorithm in Figures 1, 4 and 5 with failure pattern F .
   By Lemma 2, at some point, every correct process pi gets stuck in lines 23–27 simulating longer and
longer qj -solo extension of some finite schedule σ with input J0 . Since, processes p1 , . . . , pn use a series of
consensus instances to simulate runs of A0 in exactly the same way, the correct processes eventually agree
on σ and qj .


                                                         11
   Let e be the sequence of process identifiers in the 1-resilient execution of A0 simulated by q1 and q2 in
schedule σ · (qj ) with input J0 . Since a 2-process BG-simulation produces a 1-resilient run of A0 , at least
n − 1 simulated processes in p01 , . . . , p0n appear in e infinitely often. Let U (|U | ≥ n − 1) be the set of such
processes.
   Now we show that exactly one correct (in F ) process appears in e only finitely often. Suppose not, i.e.,
correct(F ) ⊆ U . By Theorem 1, the run of A0 simulated a far run of A, and, thus, the run must be deciding
— a contradiction. Since |U | ≥ n − 1, exactly one process appears in the run of A0 only finitely often.
Moreover, the process is correct.
   Thus, eventually, the correct processes in F stabilize at simulating longer and longer prefixes of the same
infinite non-deciding 1-resilient run of A0 . Eventually, the same correct process will be observed to take the
least number of steps in the run and output in line 26 — the output of Ω is extracted.                            



4       Related Work

   Chandra et al. derived the first “weakest failure detector” result by showing that Ω is necessary to solve
consensus in the message-passing model in their fundamental paper [4]. The result was later generalized to
the read-write shared memory model [12, 10]. 1
   The technique presented in this paper builds atop two fundamental results. The first is the celebrated
BG-simulation [1, 3] that allows k + 1 processes simulate, in a wait-free manner, a k-resilient run of any n-
process asynchronous algorithm. The second is a brilliant observation made by Zieliński [15] that any run of
an algorithm A using a failure detector D induces an asynchronous algorithm that simulates (possibly unfair)
runs of A. The recursive structure of the algorithm in Figure 5 is also borrowed from [15]. Unlike [15],
however, the reduction algorithm of this paper assumes the conventional read-write memory model without
using immediate snapshots [2]. Also, instead of growing ”precedence” and ”detector” maps of [15], this
paper uses directed acyclic graphs á la [4].

5       Concluding Remarks

   This paper presents a new proof that Ω is the weakest failure detector to solve consensus in read-write
shared memory models. The proof applies a novel reduction technique, and is based on the very fact that
wait-free 2-process consensus is impossible, unlike the original technique of [4] that partially rehashes
elements of the consensus impossibility proof.
   Several recent papers focused on determining the weakest failure detector for a generalization of con-
sensus, (n, k)-set agreement, in which n processes have to decide on at most k distinct proposed val-
ues [14, 6, 9]. For k = 1, the problem is consensus, and the weakest failure detector for (n, 1)-set agreement
is Ω. Zieliński [15] determined the weakest failure detector for (n, n − 1)-set agreement (sometimes called
simply set agreement in the literature). However, the case 1 < k < n remained unresolved until recently.
   As we show in the forthcoming paper [8], the technique proposed in this paper can be applied to determine
the weakest failure detector for (n, k)-set agreement for any 1 ≤ k ≤ n. Intuitively, BG simulation allows
k + 1 processes to simulate a k-resilient run of any asynchronous algorithm, and, generalizing the technique
described in this paper, we can derive an infinite non-deciding k-resilient run R of A0 . At least one correct
process appears only finitely often in R (otherwise, the run would be deciding). Thus, a failure detector that
    1
        The result for the shared memory as stated in [12], but the only published proof of it appears in [10].



                                                                    12
periodically outputs the latest n − k processes in growing prefixes of R guarantees that eventually some
correct process is never output. It can be easily shown that this information about failures is sufficient to
solve (n, k)-set agreement. For k > 1, we cannot use consensus to make sure that correct processes simulate
runs of A0 in exactly the same way, regardless of how their local DAGs evolve. Therefore, our generalized
reduction algorithm employs a slightly more sophisticated “eventual agreement” mechanism to make sure
that the simulation converges.

Acknowledgements

  I am grateful to Eli Gafni for the crucial observation that a reduction algorithm can directly use consensus
objects to help processes agree on the simulated executions of A0 .

References

 [1] Elizabeth Borowsky and Eli Gafni. Generalized FLP impossibility result for t-resilient asynchronous computa-
     tions. In STOC, pages 91–100. ACM Press, May 1993.
 [2] Elizabeth Borowsky and Eli Gafni. Immediate atomic snapshots and fast renaming. In PODC, pages 41–51,
     New York, NY, USA, 1993. ACM Press.
 [3] Elizabeth Borowsky, Eli Gafni, Nancy A. Lynch, and Sergio Rajsbaum. The BG distributed simulation algorithm.
     Distributed Computing, 14(3):127–146, 2001.
 [4] Tushar Deepak Chandra, Vassos Hadzilacos, and Sam Toueg. The weakest failure detector for solving consensus.
     Journal of the ACM, 43(4):685–722, July 1996.
 [5] Tushar Deepak Chandra and Sam Toueg. Unreliable failure detectors for reliable distributed systems. Journal of
     the ACM, 43(2):225–267, March 1996.
 [6] Wei Chen, Jialin Zhang, Yu Chen, and Xuezheng Liu. Weakening failure detectors for -set agreement via the
     partition approach. In DISC, pages 123–138, 2007.
 [7] Michael J. Fischer, Nancy A. Lynch, and Michael S. Paterson. Impossibility of distributed consensus with one
     faulty process. Journal of the ACM, 32(2):374–382, April 1985.
 [8] Eli Gafni and Petr Kuznetsov. The weakest failure detector for solving k-set agreement. In submission, February
     2009.
 [9] Rachid Guerraoui, Maurice Herlihy, Petr Kouznetsov, Nancy A. Lynch, and Calvin C. Newport. On the weakest
     failure detector ever. In PODC, pages 235–243, August 2007.
[10] Rachid Guerraoui and Petr Kouznetsov. Failure detectors as type boosters. Distributed Computing, 20(5):343–
     358, 2008.
[11] Prasad Jayanti and Sam Toueg. Every problem has a weakest failure detector. In PODC, pages 75–84, 2008.
[12] Wai-Kau Lo and Vassos Hadzilacos. Using failure detectors to solve consensus in asynchronous shared memory
     systems. In WDAG, LNCS 857, pages 280–295, September 1994.
[13] M.C. Loui and H.H. Abu-Amara. Memory requirements for agreement among unreliable asynchronous pro-
     cesses. Advances in Computing Research, 4:163–183, 1987.
[14] Michel Raynal and Corentin Travers. In search of the holy grail: Looking for the weakest failure detector for
     wait-free set agreement. In OPODIS, pages 3–19, 2006.
[15] Piotr Zieliński. Anti-omega: the weakest failure detector for set agreement. In PODC, August 2008.



                                                        13
